the UN Security Council passes its first
motion on the Gaza war that come after
two months of Israeli attacks that have
killed 20,000 Palestinians the
resolution weakened by us pressure calls
for more aid but not for Israel to stop
its bombardment will it have any impact
this is Inside
Story
[Music]
hello and welcome to the program I'm D
abuga the United States's backing of
Israel's war on Gaza has been crystal
clear on the military front supplying
huge quantities of weapons and money and
diplomatically Washington's also been at
the Forefront in driving Israel's cause
yet after vetoing previous un Security
Council resolutions for a ceas fire a us
exstension has finally allowed a motion
to pass a weaker version than the
original draft it agrees on AIDS but not
a ceasefire and it's taken days of
political and back room wrangling to get
it through as more Palestinians are
killed in Gaza of course for the 20,000
who are dead lying in makeshift Graves
or under the rubble the first un
Security Council vote passed during the
war is meaningless and whether it will
have any impact for those who've
survived red Israel's merciless attacks
will only be known in the coming days so
what does this vote mean for the
Palestinians and also for the United
Nations just how far is the Biden
Administration prepared to go to keep
going in supporting Israel We'll be
asking our guests these and other
questions in a few moments but first
this report from um Kum Sharif on what
happened at the UN Security
Council as Palestinians were being
killed in continuous air strikes and
ground attacks across Gaza in New York
the United Nations security Council
passed a water down resolution to
increase desperately needed Aid to the
strip the vote was delayed three times
before it passed without being vetoed as
the United States and Russia abstained
and 13 of the 15 member Council voted in
favor the Palestinian ambassador to the
UN criticized the vote and and the
security
Council it took this Council 75 days to
finally utter the word secession of
hostilities to utter the word secession
of
hostilities 40 days after the general
assembly first referred to that
objective and tens of thousands of
Palestinians killed
later the original draft called for an
urgent cessation of hostilities between
Israel and Hamas but the US opposed it
and also insisted on removing a clause
giving the UN exclusive control of
humanitarian deliveries the final vote
came after the United States vetoed a
Russian Amendment with a stronger
wording earlier I said the vote would be
a moment of truth and that's what
happened the US once again exposed their
true face in front of the world blocking
an even extremely weak call for a
cessation of hostil ities in
Gaza the US ambassador to the UN
rejected critics who said there's a
disconnect between the majority of the
UN member states that want to cease fire
and the United States that's blocked one
there's no disconnect here we are all
working to address the humanitarian
needs on the ground and we're working to
address those needs immediately that's
what this resolution is about the
resolution comes says the un's world
food program is warning a quarter of
households in Gaza that's roughly
500,000 people are
starving a un back report warns the
extent of hunger in the strip is worse
than that seen in near famines in
Afghanistan and Yemen in recent years un
Secretary General Antonio gues is
skeptical of the resolution without a
ceasefire the real problem is that the
way Israel is conducting this offensive
is creating massive obstacles to the
distribution of humanitarian Aid inside
Gaza an effective Aid operation in Gaza
requires security staff who can work in
safety logistical capacity and
resumption of commercial
activity these four elements do not
exist the vote came as Israel expanded
its ground offensive ordering more
people to evacuate from areas it had
earlier declared
safe nearly 85% of gaza's population has
been displaced and its Health Ministry
says more than 20,000 have been
killed more than 2 months into the war
the security Council has passed its
first resolution on Gaza in the weeks
ahead the challenge will be to implement
it as Palestinians endure mounting
Slaughter and humanitarian
crisis kulsum Sharif for Inside Story
so the United States has a long history
of using its veto power to back Israel
at the United Nations its first veto on
Palestine at the UN Security Council was
in
1972 it's blocked 35 un resolutions
critical of Israel in more than 50 years
two out of those vetos have been during
Israel's ongoing war on Gaza the US has
vetoed resolutions on Israel 47 times in
all including over Israel's invasion of
the south of Lebanon as well as its
occupation of Syria's Golan
Heights we'll now bring in our guest
joining us is Scott Lucas from
Birmingham in the UK he's a professor of
us and international relations at
University College Dublin and also the
founder and editor of the online news
site EA worldview from Moscow is Dimitri
babit who's a political analyst at inai
internet media project and from
Islamabad malha Loi a former Pakistan
permanent representative and ambassador
to the United Nations thank you all for
joining us um malha I'll come to you
first if we look at this latest
resolution it opposes a demand for the
suspension of hostilities but calls for
the creation of conditions to allow a
sustainable ceasefire how does that
work well I mean I think the question to
be asked is uh 10 weeks into a brutal
War with over
20,000 civilian Palestinians dead is
this all the security Council could do I
think it's a failure of its Duty and its
responsibility because after all this is
the world body uh that has primary
responsibility for the maintenance of
International Peace and security so this
resolution is so watered down uh it
doesn't even I mean let alone a
ceasefire I mean the I mean that's an
important point you rais and we're
definitely going to be talking about
that in a moment but first I'd just like
to um zero in on some of the language
that was used so when the resolution
calls for Urgent steps to establish
conditions for a sustainable ceasefire I
mean how open to interpretation is this
in your opinion you uh were a uh a
permanent representative to the United
Nations because if you look at Israel it
believes those steps uh would involve
the complete destruction of Hamas for
example so so the language used how
would you describe it
I think it's meaningless it means
absolutely nothing it will do nothing to
change the situation on the ground
because we know that several days of
negotiations where the US threatened to
use the veto unless it got the language
that it wanted and in the end it did get
the language it wanted because the
language originally was that there
should be a session of hostilities and
then the word was changed to suspension
of hostilities and then we ended up with
that being dropped in only the call for
creating the conditions whatever that
means uh it's up to anybody to interpret
that so frankly I think us delay uh and
display of duplicity led to an outcome
that is going to change absolutely
nothing while people continue to be
killed and Devastation continues you
know the UN Secretary General as your
report itself indicated has expressed
his own um disappointment and skepticism
and basically said uh this is not going
to help anything unless there is a
ceasefire how can you get humanitarian
assistance in it's not possible let's
bring in Demitri because we had reaction
from the Russian Ambassador uh saying um
that the US had rendered this resolution
toothless is that then how we explain
the Russian exstension to uh this
vote no I think Russia and the United
States abstained for absolutely
different reasons you know the the
Russian representative
the Russian side thinks that the
resolution doesn't go far enough in in
forcing Israel to stop the bombardment
and the United States wants to water
down their resolution uh let me remind
you that for many years the United
States criticized the United Nations and
uh the United States even Justified uh
its actions by passing the United
Nations such as the invasion of Iraq
such as the invasion of Yugoslavia they
explained it by by the UN being
toothless by the UN passing uh watered
down resolutions well what can be more
watered down then a resolution calling
for the creation of conditions for um
what do they say for um sustainable
ceasefire to allow for a sustainable
ceasefire that's a language that it's
time to stop
shooting exactly this is a very very
watered down language uh people dying
you know uh the shooting should be
stopped immediately so that humanitarian
Aid could come uh the Secretary General
of the United Nations has been very open
about it and still we have these uh
empty wordss and we have the United
Nations we have the United States first
blocking the security Council resolution
then we have the general assembly where
the United States votes against uh our
resolution supported by just a handful
of its you know let me just ask you this
let me just ask you this because the uh
we also heard we got reaction from the
isra from Israel's permanent
representative who called the
resolutions focus on Aid mechanisms
unnecessary and disconnected from
reality but we also know that that
resolution has changed over the past few
days until uh delegates reached the text
that they did on Friday would those
changes have been uh done not maybe not
so much in conjunction with the Israelis
but but how much pressure would the
Israelis been putting on the Americans
for example to water down the
text I think uh Israelis do not need to
pressure the Americans Americans were
more than willing to water down this
resolution there are two main points
should the uh bombardment be stopped
immediately and who controls the process
of distribute Distributing Aid uh Israel
uh wants to control that process
obviously this is not acceptable uh for
Palestinians and for many countries that
want to provide Aid so these are two
stumbling blocks and uh and the United
States keeps using them in order to
block uh any progress on these
resolutions right but we also know on
that last point you made that the US
also insisted on removing the Clause
that gives the UN exclusive control of
humanitarian delivery so we understand
that Israel still is going to manage
those Scott Lucas over to you what does
the US get out of abstaining from this
resolution after a number of days going
back and forth and then this resolution
is put out and as we're hearing from our
panelists it's almost meaningless what
does the US get out of
this well I think first of all it's
important to note it's not just the US
that's playing politics here uh we
should note that the Kremlin is using
this as a process to try to get off the
vote over its repeated vetos when it
enabled and indeed joined the Assad
regime in the mass killing of hundreds
of thousands of people in Syria and of
course it's paralyzing the security
Council over the kemin invasion of
Ukraine but in this case of the United
States what you had and you've described
this there are three key points here
first of all removing any reference to a
suspension of hostilities let alone
Association of hostilities secondly
removing the phrase giving the UN
control over Aid which effectively gives
the Israelis a veto over those supplies
and thirdly removing any reference to uh
violations of international humanitarian
law by all sides what the United States
is continuing to do is to try to sort of
maintain this idea that it has leverage
with the Israelis that somehow it can
call on the Israelis to limit the
operations they're killing civilians I
think quite
frankly that ship has sailed the US does
not have leverage with the Israelis
unless it was to restrict military aid
uh but in fact of course the United
States has increased military aid to
Israel since October 7th including more
than 15,000 bombs more than 10,000 of
which are unguided dumb bombs and the
broader answer to this is is that the
United States since the 1967 war has
treated Israel as one of its three
strategic allies in the Middle East one
of those three allies Iran is gone uh
Saudi Arabia is not an assured Ally at
this point and so us institutions are
still beted in with the Israelis and
even behind closed doors as they try to
tell the Israelis please stop please
limit this the Israel a second Scott is
the US here trying to send a message
then to uh to the world in fact that
it's still strong in the Middle
East well the the US is actually playing
both sides here are trying to play Both
Sides here now you're seeing the side
here where you've got the Biden
Administration or those officials in the
Biden Administration who publicly will
not criticize Israel over its military
operations the other side of this has
been for example vice president kamla
Harris who has publicly called for the
protection of civilians the problem here
is is that a both sides message by the
Biden Administration means almost
nothing much as Ambassador Lo mentioned
the fact that this ultimate UN
resolution means nothing until you have
a firm line from the Biden
Administration enough is enough backed
up by action which means the Restriction
of military aid to the Israelis Tel Aviv
is going to use that wiggle room you
know whatever is being told them by
behind Clos Closed Doors by Anthony
blinket for example publicly they'll
continue to expand this offensive as we
we seen in the last 48 hours uh Mala
this was a UAE Le resolution from the
get-go in which the us then managed to
water down why would the UAE allow
this I think the UAE was desperate to
get any resolution in before its term
ended on the security Council but I
think in doing that it exposed itself to
the kind of negotiations in which uh the
United States basically got its way uh
and it got its way uh to Israel benefit
uh as you said earlier uh Israel retains
uh its control over the delivery of Aid
and of course there's no ceasefire so I
think you know we have to look at the
big picture the big picture is that the
world is standing on one side as
expressed in two general assembly
resolutions Global opinion and then we
have the United States and Israel
standing on one side and yet the
Security Council is is unable to act in
any meaningful way to stop the war
because I agree with Demetri unless
unless there is an end to the blood shed
unless there's an end to the War uh it
is meaningless to talk about getting
humanitarian assistance in I mean you're
killing people and then you're saying uh
we'd like to help whoever is
surviving so uh Dimitri um H how will
the security Council
respond if Israel doesn't comply with
this
well uh it is difficult to predict uh
what will happen next but I see a very
dangerous tendency and I think Lucas uh
uh noted it very well uh the western
side is trying to uh I would call it
expand the base of the conflict they
keep mentioning Russia Ukrainian
conflict they keep comparing Russia to
Hamas which is absurd to my mind but
they keep doing it you know the United
States president is doing it several
foreign ministers in the EU are doing
that so uh I think we should all
concentrate now on seizing hostilities
this is the most important thing if the
security Council can concentrate on that
uh I'm sure uh there can be an outcome
uh but uh I I don't think anyone can
tell you what will happen in the next
seven or eight days uh because uh it's
so unpredictable that policies of the
Western countries have become
unpredictable they keep finding enemies
uh for themselves and uh also of course
the world is watching uh who are the
countries that abstained or voted
against the general assembly resolution
on seizing hostilities in uh in in Gaza
in Palestine you know Ukraine abstained
the UK abstained the US allies and the
NATO members they were the countries
that abstained right so scottt I mean it
just sounds like I'm I'm struggling to
to find um the point of such resolutions
then am I correct in saying that and and
how far away is the council from
actually making a real difference on the
ground when it comes to the war on
Gaza there is a point but is a symbolic
in terms of the Practical the military
the economic the reality is and we've
known this for decades is that the
Security Council is held hostage to the
five powers who have veto over it so the
security Council was held hostage and
could not do anything over the mass
killing in Syria or over Vladimir
Putin's invasion of Ukraine because of
the Russian veto here the Security
Council is being held hostage because of
the American veto that said I do think
it is important that you have a vast
majority of the security Council in this
case 13 of 15 members yesterday with
only Russia and the US abstaining who
have signaled the fact that they want
something to be done I think it's
important that the general assembly by
an overwhelming margin 153 of 193
station Nations calling for that
ceasefire it does highlight the
isolation of the Israelis it does
highlight that if the Israeli War
cabinet cannot quote destroy Hamas soon
as its own foreign minister said we risk
diplomatic defeat so yes this process is
not satisfying this process will not
help out Gaza civilians so Scott what
does this tell you that what does this
tell you about the US timetable when it
comes to this war because what we've
heard from the Israeli side is that they
need a few months the Americans have
reportedly said you have a few weeks and
now we have this resolution that doesn't
call for a ceasefire
fire I I I go back to a point I made
earlier that American officials have
told the Israelis behind closed doors
they've leaked it to the media that they
wanted these operations wrapped up by
December
31st I think it's evident that baring a
very quick Israeli quote victory in
southern Gaza these operations will not
wrap up so just as I said that the
Security Council is held hostage by the
US and Russia the Americans are held
hostage by the Israeli War cabinet
unless and I repeat unless the Americans
take a meaningful step which is either
to support a resolution which has
enforcement powers to bring Aid into
Gaza or unless the Americans restrict
military aid to the Israelis if they do
neither of those the Israeli War cabinet
they can proceed knowing they're not
going to suffer a punishment no matter
how many civilians and perhaps a moss
Fighters die in Gaza for weeks or even
months Mala does this resolution have
enforcement Powers how can it actually
be enforced because I mean we've spoken
also to a lot of humanitarian groups
here on Al jazer since that resolution
was passed who who said this is likely
to make no difference to
them look it's very weak I mean if you
listen to what many heads of uh uh
non-governmental organizations are
saying humanitarian organizations are
saying they're all saying the same thing
which is it's going to make precious
little difference
on the ground and I think what it does
is these sorts of actions what they do
is they undermine the legitimacy of the
security Council and that in turn brings
into question the very credibility of
the United Nations the United Nations is
then seen as you know losing any
relevance uh in a crisis that's gone on
for over 10 weeks and where the
situation gets more and more grave as
the days go by so I think this kind of
res resolution is of no help to anybody
but clearly it's a response to Growing
pressure uh there is pressure exerted by
the two G resolutions uh which clearly
call for something to be done and that
something was a ceasefire but that
didn't happen so in in you know instead
of that it's almost like substituting
what really needed to be done with
something which is so weak and as I said
before so meaningless but in a way
responding to pressure also so uh from
demonstrations that have taken place and
are continuing to take place across the
world uh public demonstrations calling
for Action to stop the genocide to stop
the Bloodshed so you know these kinds of
resolutions then are used uh really
frankly in my opinion as a smoke screen
uh because nothing really changes right
uh Dimitri what does this mean for the
Secretary General himself if anything at
all does it Empower him to speak out
more because we saw saw him a few weeks
ago invoke article 99 which calls for a
cessation of hostilities and at the time
he said that he hoped that his move
would put more pressure on the council
do you think it has pressured the
council in any way at all what does the
Secretary General do
next well unfortunately the power of the
Secretary General of the United Nations
has been decreasing in the last uh I
would say at least 20 years since the
invasion of Iraq uh uh we saw that
Security Council you
know the The veto rule which Scot
criticized uh unfortunately U I don't
think it's going to be removed because
it saved the world from a nuclear war
several times after 1945 you know the
veto power were given to the nuclear
Powers so I don't think Humanity will
say goodbye to the system that somehow
protected us for so many years but the
power of the uh general secretary has
been decreasing uh we we saw how the UN
has been unable to prevent huge
invasions such as the invasion of Iraq
such as the covered covert invasion of
Syria by uh the countries that were not
invited there by anyone not by the
Syrian government not by the uh United
Nations so I don't expect Antonio gues
to be very effective I I frankly I would
not like to be in his shoes right now he
has been powerless to stop the
repression of Russians speaking
population of Ukraine for 8 years I mean
for eight years before uh Putin started
the so-called military operation Donas
and wans were bombarded by the Ukrainian
troops and the United Nations did
nothing Scott go
ahead so I sorry I'll just come back to
you know the fundamental points to stick
with facts rather than putting out
propaganda here and the fundamental fact
here is is that I think as Ambassador Lo
has pointed out
that that as as as as unfortunately as
Ambassador Le pointed out that as long
as you have the veto power which is
placed in there by the security Council
uh it is going to be a body which is
really not going to intervene to effect
in a number of cases and this goes all
the way back to the
1950s um you know the last time the UN
Security Council really acted
effectively in an issue regarding one of
the great Powers was when it decided to
intervene in the Korean War and that's
because the Soviet Union boycotted the
security Council a mistake they bailed
never to make again so again when it
comes to the case of Iraq uh as Demitri
pointed out in 2003 yes the security
Council ultimately was powerless to
present a disastrous Invasion when it
comes to China repressing its own
population uh the security Council is
powerless to act because there'll be a
Chinese veto and when the Kremlin
creates the propaganda lines to say oh
it's okay for the Assad regime to kill
Syrian civilians because supposedly it's
all the fault of the western Powers they
can paralyze the security Council when
the Russians when the Kremlin invades
Ukraine invades Ukraine doesn't defend
Ukraine invades Ukraine then they can
say oh it's the Western Powers it's the
NATO it's their fault we're going to
cast our veto and the security Council
and then proceed to justify their own
war crimes which ensue if you want to
deal with this you fundamentally have to
deal with that question of veto power
where the five powers do not hold the
the world hostage and that means giving
more power to the general assembly or
having an expanded Security Council
where the veto power does not paralyze
it yeah where of course we know
resolutions there are in fact
non-binding but we'll have to leave it
there on that note thank you so much for
joining us Scott Lucas Demitri bichi we
appreciate your time
thanks for watching you can see the
program again anytime by visiting our
website al.com for further discussion
you can go to our Facebook page that's
facebook.com AJ insidestory join the
conversation on X our handle is AJ insid
story from myself and the whole team
here in delha thanks for watching and
bye-bye for
[Music]
now